U.N. Libya Resolution Changes Much More Than Libya

With regards to politics, how do we want to be remembered? Moreover, what part of politics is significant and still unique to our time? We could document the changes in government at the time, but that only relates to the part that is changing. We could document change, but the world is always changing. What truly defines my generation is not change, but our reaction to it. Which is why I chose security council resolution 1973, which takes all necessary measures to prevent the Libyan government from doing any further harm to its civilian population. It represented the opinion of the majority of the world’s nations about a response to Libya’s crisis. If the same struggle were to occur 50 years from now, or fifty years earlier, the response might be different, or it might elicit no response at all. But at this moment, it represents a change.

Resolution 1973 is important because it demonstrates a crucial shift in geopolitical power that is occurring during our very generation. Nations that used to need nudging by the United States to take the initiative in addressing global problems are starting to act on their own. Even more important, the U.S., which used to act with supreme power regardless of any protests, now actively seeks their support for its actions.

The United States has fought a series of costly wars alone, often with the majority of nations criticizing their actions. (Gregory) While the U.S. brought the Libyan resolution to the table, and participated in the military action, it left the command of its operations largely to its allies. This is a departure from the past  but perhaps only the start of a new era

Triggered by the world’s dissatisfaction with the Libyan regime, resolution 1973 imposed a no-fly zone, froze Libyan government assets, and embargoed all arms trade with the Qaddafi government. (BBC News) It notes that rules set earlier by the U.N. had been violated. (BBC News) The no-fly zone applied to all Libya, except for flights of purely humanitarian aid. The asset freeze applied to all Libyan military directors, not to mention Muammar Qadhafi’s own son. (BBC News)

Resolution 1973 was supported by the U.S., but carried out by a swath of nations. (Gregory) In fact, the United States went to great lengths to ensure that it was only part of a larger group effort. (Gregory) Britain, France, the African Union, even the Arab League were active participants in 
objecting to Libya’s assault of its own population. (Gregory) The United States, breaking a half-century-old tradition, left control of its forces entirely to its NATO allies, giving them command of its forces. (Gregory)

The conscious effort by United States government not to enter Libya alone is the beginning of a larger change, and in complete contrast to its policies  a dozen years ago, when it  acted entirely alone. (BBC NEWS) Kosovo was the place of conflict between the Albanians and the Serbians that started in the early 1990’s. The war crimes and inhumane conduct of the Serbians quickly turned the conflict into an all-out slaughter. NATO, for years, stood idly by. Eventually, under intense pressure from the U.S., it started a bombing campaign that quickly ended the war. (BBC NEWS) In Kosovo, the war in Europe was fought not by Europeans, but by their allies across the Atlantic. There wasn’t even a U.N. resolution to pave the way for global action. (BBC NEWS)

The point is not that the United States couldn’t act in the same way in Libya; the point is  that it didn’t. Already fighting two wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, and barely being able to pay its bills, the U.S no longer had the funds or the prestige to be the world’s policeman. (Gregory) So it stepped back, and let the other states fill in the gap.

In analyzing a source, one must look at its origin, its intentions and its impact. You can always find a bias. But not all biases are created equal. A political blog may be less biased that a school textbook which may, in turn be less biased than a diplomatic cable. A U.N. resolution is comparatively less biased because it represents an agreement between the world’s leading powers that is then approved by the majority of nations. Every security council resolution is a symbol of agreement, not just between the P5 nations, but between the entire world, or at least those who rule it. That is this source’s bias: it was written and agreed upon entirely by the world’s elite. But still, it is less biased than most sources.

That is  why politically, resolution 1973 is a symbol of our generation. Libya, and the world’s reactions to it are different than they would have been even one decade ago. If today’s politics is remembered for anything, it will be remembers as the years where the world stepped into its shoes and helped flatten the geopolitical landscape. This is a time of immense change, and one well worth living to witness.
843 Words long.